# Todo App v2 (indexes)

In this demo, we build a more complex 'Todo' app. In addition to what we built
in Todo App v1 (the basics), we let people specify a type for each todo, such as
'Home', 'Work' or 'Archived'.

We also index those types with an Indexes object so that people can see their
todos filtered by each type.

We're making changes to the Todo App v1 (the basics) demo.

[base]: # 'Todo App v1 (the basics)'

## Additional Initialization

We'll be creating an Indexes object in this demo, so we'll need an additional
import, the useCreateIndexes hook. We'll also use a SliceView component to
display the index, instead of the simple TableView component that we used
before. We'll be using a Value for the view state, so we'll also import the
useSetValueCallback hook and useValue hook.

```diff-js
-const {createStore} = TinyBase;
+const {createIndexes, createStore} = TinyBase;
 const {
   CellView,
   Provider,
-  TableView,
+  SliceView,
   useAddRowCallback,
   useCell,
+  useCreateIndexes,
   useCreateStore,
   useSetCellCallback,
+  useSetValueCallback,
+  useValue,
 } = TinyBaseUiReact;
```

We're defining a list of the types a todo can have, and giving our default todos
each a different initial type:

```diff-js
+const TYPES = ['Home', 'Work', 'Archived'];
 const INITIAL_TODOS = {
   todos: {
-    0: {text: 'Clean the floor'},
+    0: {text: 'Clean the floor', type: 'Home'},
-    1: {text: 'Install TinyBase'},
+    1: {text: 'Install TinyBase', type: 'Work'},
-    2: {text: 'Book holiday'},
+    2: {text: 'Book holiday', type: 'Archived'},
   },
 };
```

## Adding Additional Stores And Indexes

In this demo we let people select a todo type and see a filtered list. The
current type being displayed will need to be known by components across the app.
We could make this a part of the top level component's state and pass it around
with props.

But instead, we will create and memoize a second Store object called `viewStore`
to store the current type being viewed, in a Value called `type`.

We also want to index the todos by type, so we create and memoize an Indexes
object, and define an index called `types` on the `todos` Table, based on the
value of the `type` Cell:

```diff-jsx
 const App = () => {
   const store = useCreateStore(() => createStore().setTables(INITIAL_TODOS));
+  const viewStore = useCreateStore(() =>
+    createStore().setValue('type', 'Home'),
+  );
+  const indexes = useCreateIndexes(store, (store) =>
+    createIndexes(store).setIndexDefinition('types', 'todos', 'type'),
+  );

   return (
-    <Provider store={store}>
+    <Provider store={store} storesById={{viewStore}} indexes={indexes}>
       <Title />
       <NewTodo />
+      <Types />
       <Todos />
       <Inspector />
     </Provider>
   );
 };
```

Notice that we pass the new `viewStore` and `indexes` down into the app using
the same Provider that we used for the `store` in Todo App v1. We need to pass
`viewStore` in the `storesById` prop so we can refer to it explicitly for the
components that need it (to disambiguate it from the default Store object that
we provided in the `store` prop).

We also added a new component to the app called `Types`. This is a side-bar that
lists the types so people can pick one and view the filtered `Todos` list for
it.

## The `Types` Component

This new component goes on the left-hand side of the demo and lists the
available types. When people click a type name, the current type will be set in
the `viewStore` and the list on the right will be filtered accordingly.
(Additionally, a new todo will be set to have this current type when it's
added.)

The component literally just enumerates the `TYPES` array and creates a `Type`
component for each one:

```jsx
const Types = () => (
  <ul id="types">
    {TYPES.map((type) => (
      <Type key={type} type={type} />
    ))}
  </ul>
);
```

```less
#types {
  margin: 0;
}
```

## The `Type` Component

In the `Types` component, each type appears as a clickable name. The `viewStore`
provides the currently selected type, and if it matches, this component will
have an additional CSS class added to it.

If the component is clicked, the `viewStore`'s value will be updated with a
callback provided by the useSetValueCallback hook:

```jsx
const Type = ({type}) => {
  const currentType = useValue('type', 'viewStore');
  const handleClick = useSetValueCallback(
    'type',
    () => type,
    [type],
    'viewStore',
  );
  const className = 'type' + (type == currentType ? ' current' : '');

  return (
    <li className={className} onClick={handleClick}>
      {type}
    </li>
  );
};
```

**NB**: In this example, we are setting up one listener on the `viewStore` for
every instance of the `Type` component in the side bar. This makes the `Type`
components completely self-sufficient. An alternative approach would be to use
the useCell hook once in the parent `Types` component and pass down the current
type as a prop to each item. We would then pass a parameter to the
useSetCellCallback hook to set the value based on the item clicked.

Which of these two approaches is optimal in the general case will depend on the
number and complexity of the children components being rendered. For example we
will do something similar to this in the Countries demo, which has a longer list
of items in the side bar).

The `Type` component has a small amount of styling:

```less
#types .type {
  cursor: pointer;
  margin-bottom: @spacing;
  user-select: none;
  &.current {
    color: @accentColor;
  }
}
```

## Upgrading The `Todos` Component

Previously we used a TableView component to list all the todos in the `todos`
Table of the `store`. But now we want to show only the todos of the current
type. We created an Indexes object (called `indexes`) that has an index called
`types`. Within that is one slice per type, which we can render with a SliceView
component.

The slices in an index are simply sets of Row Ids from a Table grouped according
to the index's definition. Often - as here - these are sets of Row Ids that
share a particular Cell value.

We simply need to change the `Todos` component to fetch the current type from
the `viewStore`, and then pass the corresponding index slice to the SliceView
component. It still uses the `Todo` component to render each Row itself:

```diff-jsx
 const Todos = () => (
   <ul id="todos">
-    <TableView tableId="todos" rowComponent={Todo} />
+    <SliceView
+      indexId="types"
+      sliceId={useValue('type', 'viewStore')}
+      rowComponent={Todo}
+    />
   </ul>
 );
```

## Upgrading The `Todo` Component

Since the todo has the new `type` Cell, we can display that alongside the text.
In fact, we want to let people change the type for each todo too, so we
implement a new component called `TodoType` that contains as a `select`
dropdown. It has a callback to update the todo Row with the value from the
`select` element if it is changed:

```diff-jsx
 const Todo = (props) => (
   <li className="todo">
     <TodoText {...props} />
+    <TodoType {...props} />
   </li>
 );
```

```jsx
const TodoType = ({tableId, rowId}) => {
  const type = useCell(tableId, rowId, 'type');
  const handleChange = useSetCellCallback(
    tableId,
    rowId,
    'type',
    ({target: {value}}) => value,
    [],
  );

  return (
    <select className="type" onChange={handleChange} value={type}>
      {TYPES.map((type) => (
        <option>{type}</option>
      ))}
    </select>
  );
};
```

We can style the `select` element so that it appears on the right of the `Todo`
component:

```less
#todos .todo .type {
  border: none;
  color: #777;
  font: inherit;
  font-size: 0.8rem;
  margin-top: 0.1rem;
}
```

## Upgrading the `NewTodo` Component

Our final step is to make sure that when someone adds a new todo it defaults to
the current type from the `viewStore` - if only so that the newly-created todo
appears in the current IndexView component:

```diff-js
 const NewTodo = () => {
   const [text, setText] = useState('');
+  const type = useValue('type', 'viewStore');
   const handleChange = useCallback(({target: {value}}) => setText(value), []);
   const handleKeyDown = useAddRowCallback(
     'todos',
     ({which, target: {value: text}}) =>
-      which == 13 && text != '' ? {text} : null,
+      which == 13 && text != '' ? {text, type} : null,
-    [],
+    [type],
     undefined,
     () => setText(''),
     [setText],
   );
```

Note how the current type is now listed as a dependency for the handler function
so that that function is correctly memoized.

## Summary

And again, that's it: a fairly small set of changes to make the app a little
more useful. But there's more!

Next, we will build a yet more complex 'Todo' app, complete with persistence, a
schema, and metrics. Please continue to the Todo App v3 (persistence) demo.
