# Todo App v3 (persistence)

In this demo, we build a yet more complex 'Todo' app, complete with persistence
and a schema.

In the Todo App v1 (the basics) demo and the Todo App v2 (indexes) demo,
refreshing the page reset all the todos, which didn't make it very useful. In
this version, we demonstrate the basics of how to persist data from a Store.

When data is persisted, it also valuable to have a schema for it, so in this
demo we also add a simple schema for the todos.

We're making changes to the Todo App v2 (indexes) demo.

[base]: # 'Todo App v2 (indexes)'

## Additional Initialization

We will call the createLocalPersister function to create a Persister
object that persists the the main Store object in the browser's local store.
Similarly, the createSessionPersister function will create a Persister
object that persists the Store object containing the user's current view:

```diff-html
 <script src="/umd/tinybase/index.js"></script>
+<script src="/umd/tinybase/persisters/persister-browser/index.js"></script>
 <script src="/umd/tinybase/ui-react/index-debug.js"></script>
```

```diff-js
 const {createIndexes, createStore} = TinyBase;
+const {createLocalPersister, createSessionPersister} = TinyBasePersisterBrowser;
 const {
   CellView,
   Provider,
   SliceView,
   useAddRowCallback,
   useCell,
   useCreateIndexes,
+  useCreatePersister,
   useCreateStore,
   useSetCellCallback,
   useSetValueCallback,
   useValue,
 } = TinyBaseUiReactDebug;
```

## Adding a TablesSchema

A Store has a setTablesSchema method which can be used to describe a schema of
each Cell present in each Table. Here we will indicate that the `text` Cell and
`type` Cell are strings, and we default the `done` field to `false`. The `type`
can only be one of the values of the `TYPES` array:

```diff-js
 const TYPES = ['Home', 'Work', 'Archived'];
+const SCHEMA = {
+  todos: {
+    text: {type: 'string'},
+    done: {type: 'boolean', default: false},
+    type: {type: 'string', default: 'Home', allow: TYPES},
+  },
+};
```

## Persisting the Store

We create and memoize a Persister object for the main Store object. We'll start
it auto-loading from the browser's local storage immediately, but we can also
provide `INITIAL_TODOS` as a default if nothing has been previously saved. We
also set the Persister object to auto-save, creating a continuous
synchronization between the in-memory version of the Store object and the copy
of it in the browser's local storage.

Note that we don't set the initial data of the Store object when we first create
it, since it might have been persisted into the browser's local storage from a
previous session, and we want to pick it up with the first load. We do configure
the schema on creation though:

```diff-js
-  const store = useCreateStore(() => createStore().setTables(INITIAL_TODOS));
+  const store = useCreateStore(() => createStore().setTablesSchema(SCHEMA));
+  useCreatePersister(
+    store,
+    (store) => createLocalPersister(store, 'todos/store'),
+    [],
+    async (persister) => {
+      await persister.startAutoLoad([INITIAL_TODOS]);
+      await persister.startAutoSave();
+    },
+  );
```

We do something similar for the `viewStore`, so that reloads preserve the
type currently being viewed. Instead of local storage, we'll use the browser's
session storage. This means that if the user has two browser windows open, the
UI changes to one won't mysteriously affect the other:

```diff-js
-  const viewStore = useCreateStore(() =>
-    createStore().setValue('type', 'Home'),
-  );
+  const viewStore = useCreateStore(() =>
+    createStore().setValuesSchema({type: {type: 'string', default: 'Home'}}),
+  );
+  useCreatePersister(
+    viewStore,
+    (store) => createSessionPersister(store, 'todos/viewStore'),
+    [],
+    async (persister) => {
+      await persister.startAutoLoad();
+      await persister.startAutoSave();
+    },
+  );
```

Make some changes to the todos and then reload your browser!

We now have a fairly useful app for tracking todos and persisting the state. Please continue to the Todo App v4 (metrics) demo.
