# Todo App v6 (collaboration)

In this version of the Todo app, we use a Synchronizer to make the application
collaborative.

We're making changes to the Todo App v5 (checkpoints) demo.

[base]: # 'Todo App v5 (checkpoints)'

## Server Implementation

To have a collaborative experience, you need to deploy a server that can forward
the WebSocket messages between multiple clients. TinyBase provides a ready-made
server for this purpose called WsServer, available in the synchronizer-ws-server
module.

The server implementation for this demo is in the top level 'support' directory
of the TinyBase repo for reference. At its heart, it is as simple as this:

```js ignore
import {WsServer} from 'tinybase/synchronizers/synchronizer-ws-server';
const server = createWsServer(new ws.WebSocketServer({port: 8043}));
```

The createWsServer function takes an instance of a WebSocketServer (from the
well known [ws](https://github.com/websockets/ws) library). This allows you to
configure the underlying server in whatever ways you like.

Note that in this demo, the server is not saving a copy of the data itself - it
is merely acting as a broker between clients. Nevertheless, such a configuration
would be possible if you were building an application that needed a server
'source-of-truth'.

For the purposes of this demo, this server has been deployed to
`todo.demo.tinybase.org`, and exposed on the HTTPS port of 443. On the client,
we need to configure its address:

```js
const WS_SERVER = 'wss://todo.demo.tinybase.org/';
```

With our server deployed, let's go back to the rest of the client app...

## Only A MergeableStore Can Be Synchronized

Up until now, we have been using a regular TinyBase Store. But in order to
synchronize data between clients, we need to upgrade that to be a MergeableStore
so that it tracks the metadata required to merge without conflicts.

There is a simple change to the hook that creates the Store:

```diff-js
-const store = useCreateStore(() => createStore().setTablesSchema(SCHEMA));
+const store = useCreateMergeableStore(() =>
+  createMergeableStore().setTablesSchema(SCHEMA),
+);
```

Since a MergeableStore is fully compatible with the Store API, there are no
other changes required within the app to accommodate this upgrade.

## Additional Imports

To communicate with the server, we use a WsSynchronizer. This is in the
synchronizer-ws-client module, and so we need to add that to our app:

```diff-html
 <script src="/umd/persister-browser.js"></script>
+<script src="/umd/synchronizer-ws-client.js"></script>
```

We import the function to create it accordingly:

```diff-js
 const {createLocalPersister, createSessionPersister} = TinyBasePersisterBrowser;
+const {createWsSynchronizer} = TinyBaseSynchronizerWsClient;
```

In turn, the WsSynchronizer is initialized with a WebSocket. This can be the
browser's default implementation.

We need to add in the new Store creation function as described above (as well as
a unique Id generator we'll be using):

```diff-js
-const {createCheckpoints, createIndexes, createMetrics, createStore} = TinyBase;
+const {
+  createCheckpoints,
+  createIndexes,
+  createMergeableStore,
+  createMetrics,
+  createStore,
+  getUniqueId,
+} = TinyBase;
```

And we do the same for the creation hook, as well as making sure we add the
useCreateSynchronizer hook:

```diff-js
 const {
   CellView,
   CheckpointView,
   Provider,
   SliceView,
   useAddRowCallback,
   useCell,
   useCheckpoints,
   useCreateCheckpoints,
   useCreateIndexes,
+  useCreateMergeableStore,
   useCreateMetrics,
   useCreatePersister,
   useCreateStore,
+  useCreateSynchronizer,
   useMetric,
   useRedoInformation,
   useRow,
   useSetCellCallback,
   useSetCheckpointCallback,
   useSetValueCallback,
   useUndoInformation,
   useValue,
 } = TinyBaseUiReact;
```

## Getting And Creating A Collaborative Space

To make our application shareable, we need a unique space on the server where
multiple clients can see the same todo list. The server supports multiple of
these spaces, and distinguishes between them simply by the path used when the
WebSocket connects.

For example, one set of people might collaborate on a todo list brokered by
`wss://todo.demo.tinybase.org/1234`, others on a todo list brokered by
`wss://todo.demo.tinybase.org/5678` - and so on.

We want to be able to create a unique Id from this app that can be used for the
connection, and which updates the demo's browser URL so that it can be shared
with others.

There are many more sophisticated ways to do this, but we are going for a simple
approach of using the URL query string to store our unique Id. We use a hook to
store the path in the App's state, and which gets the initial value. It also
provides a function that creates a new room and updates the URL accordingly.

Helpfully, TinyBase provides a URL-safe unique Id generator, the getUniqueId
function, that we can use:

```js
const useServerPathId = () => {
  const [serverPathId, setServerPathId] = useState(
    parent.location.search.substring(1),
  );
  return [
    serverPathId,
    useCallback(() => {
      const newServerPathId = getUniqueId();
      parent.history.replaceState(null, null, '?' + newServerPathId);
      setServerPathId(newServerPathId);
    }, []),
  ];
};
```

Note that we work with the `parent` location, rather than the `window` object.
This is simply because the TinyBase demo runs in a trusted iframe and needs to
get the URL from the outer page. Fortunately `parent` still resolves to `window`
even when this _isn't_ running in an iframe.

## Synchronizing to the server

We use this new hook in the top level of the App component, and then create the
WsSynchronizer. We make this conditional: if there is no server path Id (yet),
the useCreateSynchronizer method returns nothing. Once a server path Id exists,
it will instead create the Synchronizer asynchronously, using the address formed
by combining the host and the path itself.

Note that we are still persisting the data locally to local storage, but we put
the MergeableStore in a different key to the Store from the previous demos (in
case you go back to previous chapters and want the simpler Store's serialization
to be still present).

```diff-js
   useCreatePersister(
     store,
-    (store) => createLocalPersister(store, 'todos/store'),
+    (store) => createLocalPersister(store, 'todos/mergeableStore'),
     [],
     async (persister) => {
       await persister.startAutoLoad([INITIAL_TODOS]);
       checkpoints?.clear();
       await persister.startAutoSave();
     },
     [checkpoints],
   );
+  const [serverPathId, createServerPathId] = useServerPathId();
+  useCreateSynchronizer(
+    store,
+    async (store) => {
+      if (serverPathId) {
+        const synchronizer = await createWsSynchronizer(
+          store,
+          new WebSocket(WS_SERVER + serverPathId),
+        );
+        await synchronizer.startSync();
+        checkpoints?.clear();
+        return synchronizer;
+      }
+    },
+    [serverPathId, checkpoints],
+  );
```

As we did for local storage, we also reset the checkpoints so this process does
not appear on the undo stack.

## Adding A Share Button

All that remains is to give the user a way to create the server path to start
sharing! Let's add a single component called Share to do that. It takes the
server path Id value and function from the app-level state, and renders either a
button to create a room and start sharing, or a link to the room that is already
being shared to.

```jsx
const Share = ({serverPathId, createServerPathId}) => (
  <div id="share">
    {serverPathId ? (
      <a href={'?' + serverPathId} target="_blank">
        &#128279; Share link
      </a>
    ) : (
      <span onClick={createServerPathId}>&#128228; Start sharing</span>
    )}
  </div>
);
```

We can add this to the top of the left-hand side of the app. For the sake of
clarity, we remove the undo buttons for now:

```diff-js
-      <Title />
+      <Share
+        serverPathId={serverPathId}
+        createServerPathId={createServerPathId}
+      />
       <NewTodo />
       <Types />
-      <UndoRedo />
       <Todos />
+      <Title />
       <StoreInspector />
```

Let's give it this share button some styling to make it prominent for this demo:

```less
#share {
  a,
  span {
    background: #eee;
    border: @border;
    color: #000;
    cursor: pointer;
    display: inline-block;
    padding: 0.5rem 1rem;
    text-align: center;
    text-decoration: none;
    width: 10rem;
  }
  a {
    border-color: @accentColor;
    background: #ddd;
  }
}
```

And we are good to go! Clicking the 'Start sharing' button will add a query
string to the URL and start sharing to the WebSocket server. Clicking the 'Share
link' button will launch a new browser window with the same server path Id in
it.

As you can see, the results are synchronized, but that's also because the tabs
of your browser are sharing the local storage we set up in a previous demo. A
better demo is to launch a new window in incognito mode or even a completely
different browser! If all goes well, you will still see the shared todo list.

## Summary

We went from local-first to collaboration with just a few additions of code and
the magic of TinyBase synchronization.
